README.md, before:

![QA Final DevOps Project - Team CodeVid](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/0412b57a001b10733813c3494d594a77/Header.png)

This project is the final 3rd project of our 3 month Bootcamp. We have to work as a team to plan, design and implement a solution to deploy the supplied application. This challenge is to see what we can produce and how well we can apply the knowledge gained over the last 11 weeks, we can use any number of tools and frameworks available to us. One of the main purposes of this project is for each of us to experience working within a team to complete a deliverable, this experience will be invaluable for our future potential employees.

### **Scope**

We will be working with these externally developed applications:
- https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-angular
- https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest

They are well-documented applications for the ‘Spring Pet Clinic’ domain, one of which serves as a front end client using AngularJS and the other as an API using Java. In short, we will be expected to deploy this application.

### **Requirements**

We will need to plan, design, implement a solution for automating the development of workflows and deployments of this application. As part of our final deliverable, we are required to discuss the project in a presentation and demonstrate these workflows on Friday. Using what we have learned during the past 11 weeks we will consider the following:

- **What tools will work for you best?** For example: Terraform, Kubernetes, Ansible etc. There is no restrictions or requirements on which ones to use; you should decide which you feel are most appropriate and justify their use.
- **Multiple Environment support:** How can a developer test their new features on an environment before merging their changes to the main branch?
- **How can changes on the GitHub repository automatically build and deploy** to testing and live environments?
- **Running costs.** What are your monthly estimates? How could they be improved?

<!-- 1. **Management:**
    - Daily Sprints —> stand-ups and Trello Board
    - Decide what tools to use for what purpose 
    - Design a CI/CD pipeline with the chosen tools
    - Consider how the price will affect the CI/CD pipeline —> running costs
    - Will it have multiple environment support?
    - How will we integrate webhooks to work with GitHub?
    - How will we implement testing?
2. **Code:**
    - Use the tools practised; Terraform, Ansible, Kubernetes...etc
    - Deploy Kubernetes Cluster in Cloud, using Terraform
    - Have all microservices contained using Docker
    - Use configuration software to automate containerisation and deployment
    - Use Deployment software to develop a CI/CD pipeline including built, test and deploy stages
    - Use a Cloud provider
3. **Documentation:**
    - Specification for the project
    - Project Planning and Initial Management
    - Risk Assessment
    - CI/CD pipeline
    - Cloud Infrastructure
    - Project management final
    - Sprint Retrospective
4. **Presentation:**
    - What you did and why
    - Demo of the project
    - Explanation for each CI/CD component
    - Explanation for choices and price for real deployment in the field
    - Sprint Retrospective and Project management
    - Additional Info -->

***
## **Contents**
* [Planning](#Planning)
* [Risk assessment](#Risk-assessment)
* [CI/CD Pipeline](#CI/CD-Pipeline)
* [Terraform and Kubernetes](#Terraform-and-Kubernetes)
* [Jenkins](#Jenkins)
* [Costs](#Costs)
* [Team Members](#Team-Members)

***
## **Planning**

Planning is a large part of this project. We will be spending a large amount of time planning, researching and choosing the technologies we will be using to deploy this app. In the first part of this week-long project we spent planning and researching the technologies how we wanted to complete this project. We will be using this [Trello](https://trello.com/b/RNcvphoe/codevid-final-project) board to create a todo list, doing list and done list. This will help us assign jobs and keep everyone informed on what needs to be done, and what each member is up to. All week we will have run morning stand-ups. In these stand-ups, we will discuss any issues or ideas we have had since our last meeting. We will update the Trello board above to reflect any new tasks we will implement, update how far each task has progressed and assign new tasks to members when needed. We are also taking part in afternoon mini-meetings to touch base with each other and to make sure everyone is on the same thought process(no one will be left behind!)

This is our initial Trello board after our first day in the project. As you can see we have created quite a few tasks to do and have assigned them to members through tags.

![Initial Trello Board](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/aa78bcb586afb161fdf2ae47b8ea3a82/Initial_Trello_Board.png)

***
## **Risk assessment**

This is our initial risk assessment from the start of our project.

![initial_risk_assessment](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/3d495ce0c66ed7fa52472331fbdaea6d/Initial_risk_assesment.png)

***
## **CI/CD Pipeline**

Below is our initial CI/CD Pipeline, which we decided on at the beginning of the project.

![Our Pipeline](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/92623ad4d78d7356357b905b20e2a75a/CI_CD_Pipeline.png)

While we were learning about Kubernetes and how to use it, we discovered that it can take up to 20 min to initially start up a cluster. Below is our plan to cut down that time. Part 1 will be initialised once and part 2 will run through Jenkins via a GitHub webhook. We will talk more about each stage in depth further on in this document.

Part 1 Terraform
1. Set up IAM roles and policies (will do than on your AWS account directly)
2. Set up networking
3. Set up Kubernetes cluster
4. Set up RDS

Part 2 Jenkins Pull code from GitHub
1. Pull code from GitHub
2. Test code
3. Build images
4. Deploy images to the Kubernetes cluster
5. Rejoice :smile:

***
## **Terraform and Kubernetes**
 We will be using Terraform to set up networking, our Kubernetes cluster and our RDS database. This will only need to be done once. Once `terraform apply` had been executed and the cluster has successfully built with through Kubernetes, all other updates can be handled by a Jenkins/GitHub webhook.

First, we created an IAM user that we will give policies and permissions to run our Kubernetes.

![IAM Users](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/d32ec05c8a2623ce33ad029c56390e31/IAM_Users.png)

Below you will find all the policies and permissions we granted to our Kubernetes user.

![IAM Policies](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/d589c035a5ec44d036130527b41387ed/IAM_Policies_permissions.png)

This user's credentials will enable us to automate everything in our Terraform and Kubernetes files and folders. All credentials and sensitive information (secret keys, passwords etc)will be protected and hidden with variables.tf files.

With terraform, we set up networking.

![VPC](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/17e2ac118da3bfe3f7b062a04cad6d0c/VPC.png)

And our Kubernetes Cluster.

![Cluster](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/1c03d6de132cb5f6d160b282ac763add/Clusters.png)

Our cluster is made up of four EC2 instances.

![EC2's](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/d726491d9c29ad5fb72d20d27938981b/Instances.png)

Finally, our RDS Database is created.

![RDS](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/59fb20b0718d1a45d8d79ba066b72c1d/RDS_Database.png)

***
## **Jenkins**

We will use Jenkins to build our CI/CD pipeline, by pulling the code from this GitHub Repo. We will then run the test code, build our images with Docker, and Deploy the Docker images to the Kubernetes cluster. Our pipeline job will be automatically triggered to build every time something is pushed to our main GitHub repository branch with the use of webhooks.

As you can see below, we had successfully deployed our app after 11 builds. And looking further with the Jenkins console output, you can see we are an issue also free.

![Jenkins pipeline and console](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/5c859459a33274a19817dc201aae5e4b/Jenkins.png)

We have five stages in our Jenkins pipeline: Checkout SCM, Setting up the database, testing, building images and deploy.

**Setting up database** - We had to enter our RDS credentials to give Jenkins permissions to access at populate the database. This securely stores our sensitive information without saving them to GitHub. Then the database.sh script is run; Installs MySQL client package, removes the existing temp_dir, create a new temp_dir (ideal for testing), git clones the spring-petclinic-rest repo, create and populate the petplinic database and finally cleans up the testing temp-dir.

**Testing** - This stage will run the tests that we were supplied with to make sure this application runs as intended. The existing repo is removed and re-cloned from GitHub to ensure any changes to the tests will be used. Java, OpenJDK and Maven are then installed after entering the correct directory. Lastly, the tests are run with the simple command `mvn test`

**Build images** - Again we utilised credentials to give Jenkins access to our DockerHub account. The first script is run which installed Docker programmes needed. The Second script instructs Jenkins to build all our images and push them to DockerHub.

**Deploy images** - Will use supplied credentials to run two scripts that install dependencies and deploy the pods. The install dependencies script installs awscli and kubeclt, then configures both AWS and kubeconfig. Finally, Our Deploy script is run which runs our back end REST API, our front end Angular file and our load balancer service.

***
## **Costs**

We want to keep costs down to a minimum for this project, while still delivering a high-quality application.

***
## **Team Members**

- [Derand Demaj](https://github.com/DerandStudent)
- [Ashley Edge](https://github.com/Ashley-Edge)
- [Mohammed Hallaq](https://github.com/mhallaq)
- [Julia Jablonska](https://github.com/stegojulia)
- [Mohammed Sayeed](https://github.com/abusyd1)

Commit message:

Adding new CI/CD Pipeline

README.md, after:

![QA Final DevOps Project - Team CodeVid](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/0412b57a001b10733813c3494d594a77/Header.png)

This project is the final 3rd project of our 3 month Bootcamp. We have to work as a team to plan, design and implement a solution to deploy the supplied application. This challenge is to see what we can produce and how well we can apply the knowledge gained over the last 11 weeks, we can use any number of tools and frameworks available to us. One of the main purposes of this project is for each of us to experience working within a team to complete a deliverable, this experience will be invaluable for our future potential employees.

### **Scope**

We will be working with these externally developed applications:
- https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-angular
- https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest

They are well-documented applications for the ‘Spring Pet Clinic’ domain, one of which serves as a front end client using AngularJS and the other as an API using Java. In short, we will be expected to deploy this application.

### **Requirements**

We will need to plan, design, implement a solution for automating the development of workflows and deployments of this application. As part of our final deliverable, we are required to discuss the project in a presentation and demonstrate these workflows on Friday. Using what we have learned during the past 11 weeks we will consider the following:

- **What tools will work for you best?** For example: Terraform, Kubernetes, Ansible etc. There is no restrictions or requirements on which ones to use; you should decide which you feel are most appropriate and justify their use.
- **Multiple Environment support:** How can a developer test their new features on an environment before merging their changes to the main branch?
- **How can changes on the GitHub repository automatically build and deploy** to testing and live environments?
- **Running costs.** What are your monthly estimates? How could they be improved?

<!-- 1. **Management:**
    - Daily Sprints —> stand-ups and Trello Board
    - Decide what tools to use for what purpose 
    - Design a CI/CD pipeline with the chosen tools
    - Consider how the price will affect the CI/CD pipeline —> running costs
    - Will it have multiple environment support?
    - How will we integrate webhooks to work with GitHub?
    - How will we implement testing?
2. **Code:**
    - Use the tools practised; Terraform, Ansible, Kubernetes...etc
    - Deploy Kubernetes Cluster in Cloud, using Terraform
    - Have all microservices contained using Docker
    - Use configuration software to automate containerisation and deployment
    - Use Deployment software to develop a CI/CD pipeline including built, test and deploy stages
    - Use a Cloud provider
3. **Documentation:**
    - Specification for the project
    - Project Planning and Initial Management
    - Risk Assessment
    - CI/CD pipeline
    - Cloud Infrastructure
    - Project management final
    - Sprint Retrospective
4. **Presentation:**
    - What you did and why
    - Demo of the project
    - Explanation for each CI/CD component
    - Explanation for choices and price for real deployment in the field
    - Sprint Retrospective and Project management
    - Additional Info -->

***
## **Contents**
* [Planning](#Planning)
* [Risk assessment](#Risk-assessment)
* [CI/CD Pipeline](#CI/CD-Pipeline)
* [Terraform and Kubernetes](#Terraform-and-Kubernetes)
* [Jenkins](#Jenkins)
* [Costs](#Costs)
* [Team Members](#Team-Members)

***
## **Planning**

Planning is a large part of this project. We will be spending a large amount of time planning, researching and choosing the technologies we will be using to deploy this app. In the first part of this week-long project we spent planning and researching the technologies how we wanted to complete this project. We will be using this [Trello](https://trello.com/b/RNcvphoe/codevid-final-project) board to create a todo list, doing list and done list. This will help us assign jobs and keep everyone informed on what needs to be done, and what each member is up to. All week we will have run morning stand-ups. In these stand-ups, we will discuss any issues or ideas we have had since our last meeting. We will update the Trello board above to reflect any new tasks we will implement, update how far each task has progressed and assign new tasks to members when needed. We are also taking part in afternoon mini-meetings to touch base with each other and to make sure everyone is on the same thought process(no one will be left behind!)

This is our initial Trello board after our first day in the project. As you can see we have created quite a few tasks to do and have assigned them to members through tags.

![Initial Trello Board](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/aa78bcb586afb161fdf2ae47b8ea3a82/Initial_Trello_Board.png)

***
## **Risk assessment**

This is our initial risk assessment from the start of our project.

![initial_risk_assessment](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/3d495ce0c66ed7fa52472331fbdaea6d/Initial_risk_assesment.png)

***
## **CI/CD Pipeline**

Below is our initial CI/CD Pipeline, which we decided on at the beginning of the project.

![Our Pipeline](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/92623ad4d78d7356357b905b20e2a75a/CI_CD_Pipeline.png)

Here is our final CI/CD Pipeline we made once we completed the project
![Final CI/CD Pipeline](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/1aed1873d81969f1aaaba1106daba671/Final_CICD_pipeline.png)

While we were learning about Kubernetes and how to use it, we discovered that it can take up to 20 min to initially start up a cluster. Below is our plan to cut down that time. Part 1 will be initialised once and part 2 will run through Jenkins via a GitHub webhook. We will talk more about each stage in depth further on in this document.

Part 1 Terraform
1. Set up IAM roles and policies (will do that on your AWS account directly)
2. Set up networking
3. Set up Kubernetes cluster
4. Set up RDS

Part 2 Jenkins Pull code from GitHub
1. Pull code from GitHub
2. Test code
3. Build images
4. Deploy images to the Kubernetes cluster
5. Rejoice :smile:

***
## **Terraform and Kubernetes**
 We will be using Terraform to set up networking, our Kubernetes cluster and our RDS database. This will only need to be done once. Once `terraform apply` had been executed and the cluster has successfully built with through Kubernetes, all other updates can be handled by a Jenkins/GitHub webhook.

First, we created an IAM user that we will give policies and permissions to run our Kubernetes.

![IAM Users](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/d32ec05c8a2623ce33ad029c56390e31/IAM_Users.png)

Below you will find all the policies and permissions we granted to our Kubernetes user.

![IAM Policies](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/d589c035a5ec44d036130527b41387ed/IAM_Policies_permissions.png)

This user's credentials will enable us to automate everything in our Terraform and Kubernetes files and folders. All credentials and sensitive information (secret keys, passwords etc)will be protected and hidden with variables.tf files.

With terraform, we set up networking.

![VPC](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/17e2ac118da3bfe3f7b062a04cad6d0c/VPC.png)

And our Kubernetes Cluster.

![Cluster](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/1c03d6de132cb5f6d160b282ac763add/Clusters.png)

Our cluster is made up of four EC2 instances.

![EC2's](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/d726491d9c29ad5fb72d20d27938981b/Instances.png)

Finally, our RDS Database is created.

![RDS](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/59fb20b0718d1a45d8d79ba066b72c1d/RDS_Database.png)

***
## **Jenkins**

We will use Jenkins to build our CI/CD pipeline, by pulling the code from this GitHub Repo. We will then run the test code, build our images with Docker, and Deploy the Docker images to the Kubernetes cluster. Our pipeline job will be automatically triggered to build every time something is pushed to our main GitHub repository branch with the use of webhooks.

As you can see below, we had successfully deployed our app after 11 builds. And looking further with the Jenkins console output, you can see we are an issue also free.

![Jenkins pipeline and console](https://trello-attachments.s3.amazonaws.com/605757e19c8c9e860a20a456/605865ea41150d72499a922d/5c859459a33274a19817dc201aae5e4b/Jenkins.png)

We have five stages in our Jenkins pipeline: Checkout SCM, Setting up the database, testing, building images and deploy.

**Setting up database** - We had to enter our RDS credentials to give Jenkins permissions to access at populate the database. This securely stores our sensitive information without saving them to GitHub. Then the database.sh script is run; Installs MySQL client package, removes the existing temp_dir, create a new temp_dir (ideal for testing), git clones the spring-petclinic-rest repo, create and populate the petplinic database and finally cleans up the testing temp-dir.

**Testing** - This stage will run the tests that we were supplied with to make sure this application runs as intended. The existing repo is removed and re-cloned from GitHub to ensure any changes to the tests will be used. Java, OpenJDK and Maven are then installed after entering the correct directory. Lastly, the tests are run with the simple command `mvn test`

**Build images** - Again we utilised credentials to give Jenkins access to our DockerHub account. The first script is run which installed Docker programmes needed. The Second script instructs Jenkins to build all our images and push them to DockerHub.

**Deploy images** - Will use supplied credentials to run two scripts that install dependencies and deploy the pods. The install dependencies script installs awscli and kubeclt, then configures both AWS and kubeconfig. Finally, Our Deploy script is run which runs our back end REST API, our front end Angular file and our load balancer service.

***
## **Costs**

We want to keep costs down to a minimum for this project, while still delivering a high-quality application.

***
## **Team Members**

- [Derand Demaj](https://github.com/DerandStudent)
- [Ashley Edge](https://github.com/Ashley-Edge)
- [Mohammed Hallaq](https://github.com/mhallaq)
- [Julia Jablonska](https://github.com/stegojulia)
- [Mohammed Sayeed](https://github.com/abusyd1)
